[Documentation Code Camp] docstrings for emitted signals (#866)
mxcube/mxcubecore: docs/source/dev/hwobj_signals.md

Reviewer: Personal preference, we do not have a policy for this as far as I know: I tend to prefer "_[Semantic Line Breaks](https://sembr.org/)_".

Reviewer 2: Fabien only just introduced me to semantic line breaks, but I am heartily in favour.

Reviewer 3: wait, semantic break is the same things as putting each sentence on it's own line?

Reviewer: > semantic break is the same things as putting each sentence on it's own line?

No.

I never read the full document, only the introduction, I do not see much point in being strict about this. But to me, the important thing is to break long paragraphs where it makes sense logically.

So in Markdown I would write like this:

```none
I never read the full document, only the introduction,
I do not see much point in being strict about this.
But to me, the important thing is to break long paragraphs
where it makes sense logically.
```

# MXCuBECore HardwareObject signals

:Created: 20240318

> MXCuBE relies heavily on signals beeing emmited and listened to by many elements. For example, a hardware object may listen to other lower level hardware objects in order to update values after some calculation. But it is also critical in the UI (both web and QT), in both cases they expect periodic signal updates for displaying the most recent information to the user (e.g. motor positions, data collection state, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MXCuBE relies heavily on signals being emitted and listened to by many elements. For example, a hardware object may listen to other lower level hardware objects in order to update values after some calculation. But it is also critical in the UI (both web and Qt), in both cases they expect periodic signal updates for displaying the most recent information to the user (e.g. motor positions, data collection state, etc.)
```

## Implementation

> Depending on the installed modules signals are emitted using [Louie](https://pypi.org/project/Louie/) or [PyDispatcher](https://pypi.org/project/PyDispatcher/). The former being based on the later. The developer does not need to deal with the differences between those two modules as it is already being handled in the file [dispatcher](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/dispatcher.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the installed modules, signals are emitted using [Louie](https://pypi.org/project/Louie/) or [PyDispatcher](https://pypi.org/project/PyDispatcher/). The former being based on the later. The developer does not need to deal with the differences between those two modules as it is already being handled in the file [dispatcher](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/dispatcher.py).
```

>  **_NOTE:_**  can we remove of of those dependencies?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 **_NOTE:_**  can we remove any of those dependencies?
```

> PyDispatcher provides the Python programmer with a multiple-producer-multiple-consumer signal registration and routing infrastructure for use in multiple contexts

When certain events or conditions occur within a hardware object, corresponding signals are emitted to inform connected components or modules about these changes.

> The [BaseHardwareObject](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/BaseHardwareObjects.py) class serves as the base class for all hardware objects in MXCuBE. It includes methods for defining and emitting signals, allowing derived classes to customize signal emission based on their specific requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {py:class}`mxcubecore.BaseHardwareObjects.HardwareObject` class serves as the base class for all hardware objects in MXCuBE. It includes methods for defining and emitting signals, allowing derived classes to customize signal emission based on their specific requirements.
```

### Emit

Signals are typically emitted when the state of a hardware object changes, such as when it becomes ready for operation, encounters an error, or completes a task. Additionally, signals may be emitted to indicate changes in parameters or settings of the hardware, such as new setpoints, values, or configuration options.

> To emit a signal, derived classes can use the `emit` method provided by the BaseHardwareObject class. This method takes the name of the signal as an argument and optionally includes additional data or parameters to pass along with the signal. This method calls the `dispatcher.send` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To emit a signal, derived classes can use the {py:meth}`mxcubecore.BaseHardwareObjects.HardwareObjectMixin.emit` method provided by the {py:class}`HardwareObject` class. This method takes the name of the signal as an argument and optionally includes additional data or parameters to pass along with the signal. This method calls the `dispatcher.send` method.
```

> From the _BaseHardwareObject_ class (removing extra lines for brevity):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the {py:class}`HardwareObject` class (removing extra lines for brevity):
```

```
    def emit(self, signal: Union[str, object, Any], *args) -> None:
        signal = str(signal)

        if len(args) == 1:
            if isinstance(args[0], tuple):
                args = args[0]
        dispatcher.send(signal, self, *args)
```

> So, in a custom hardware object, since inhnerits from _BaseHardwareObject_, one only needs to call: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, in a custom hardware object, since it inherits from {py:class}`HardwareObject`, one only needs to call: 
```

```
self.emit('my_signal', new_value)
```

### Receive

> _BaseHardwareObject_ implements the following ```connect```method, built around the homonymous method of _PyDispatcher_. Making it more convenient to use. The functions provides syntactic sugar ; Instead of ```self.connect(self, "signal", slot)``` it is possible to do ```self.connect("signal", slot)```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{py:class}`HardwareObject` implements the following {py:meth}`HardwareObjectMixin.connect` method, built around the homonymous method of _PyDispatcher_. Making it more convenient to use. The functions provides syntactic sugar: instead of `self.connect(self, "signal", slot)` it is possible to do `self.connect("signal", slot)`.
```

> From the [BaseHardwareObject](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/BaseHardwareObjects.py#L878) class (removing extra lines for brevity):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the {py:meth}`HardwareObjectMixin.connect` method (removing extra lines for brevity):
```

        slot: Optional[Callable] = None,
    ) -> None:
        """Connect a signal sent by self to a slot.

        Args:
            sender (Union[str, object, Any]): If a string, interprted as the signal.
            signal (Union[str, Any]): In practice a string, or dispatcher.
            Any if sender is a string interpreted as the slot.
            slot (Optional[Callable], optional): In practice a functon or method.
            Defaults to None.

        Raises:
            ValueError: If slot is None and "sender" parameter is not a string.
        """

        if slot is None:
            if isinstance(sender, str):
                slot = signal
                signal = sender
                sender = self
            else:
                raise ValueError("invalid slot (None)")

        signal = str(signal)

        dispatcher.connect(slot, signal, sender)

        self.connect_dict[sender] = {"signal": signal, "slot": slot}

        if hasattr(sender, "connect_notify"):
            sender.connect_notify(signal)
```

And an example usage on a custom hardware object would be:

```
    self.connect(some_other_hwobj, "a_signal", callback_method)
```

> This assumes that ```some_other_hwobj``` is linked in the custom hwobj initialization, and _callback_method_ must exist, otherwise an exception will happen once the signal is received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumes that `some_other_hwobj` is linked in the custom hardware object initialization, and `callback_method` must exist, otherwise an exception will happen once the signal is received.
```

> If the sender hwobj has a method named ```connect_notify```, it will be called on connect. Since this connect happens at application init, this typically triggers the emission of all signals during initialization, and thus all receivers start with the most recent value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the sender hardware object has a method named `connect_notify`, it will be called on connect. Since this connect happens at application initialization, this typically triggers the emission of all signals during initialization, and thus all receivers start with the most recent value.
```

2024-03-18 12:21:15.402110 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.7041173058901172,)
2024-03-18 12:21:18.407419 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.39293503718591827
2024-03-18 12:21:18.407770 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.39293503718591827,)
2024-03-18 12:21:21.411648 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.8190801968640632
2024-03-18 12:21:21.411897 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.8190801968640632,)
2024-03-18 12:21:24.417379 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.5170546126120815
2024-03-18 12:21:24.418428 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.5170546126120815,)
2024-03-18 12:21:27.420696 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.27400475091220955
2024-03-18 12:21:27.421434 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.27400475091220955,)
2024-03-18 12:21:30.426785 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.3473955083798488
2024-03-18 12:21:30.427018 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.3473955083798488,)
2024-03-18 12:21:33.427715 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.9503048610962694
2024-03-18 12:21:33.427902 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.9503048610962694,)
In [3]: ho1.stop()
```

As you can see, the second hardware object receives and processes first one's signal.

> > At least one entry must appear in the beamline config yml file, in this case I left the procedure mockup, all the other mockups are commented. Thats why only a few items appear in the loading table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> At least one entry must appear in the beamline's YAML configuration file. In this case I left the procedure mockup only, all the other mockups are commented. That is why only a few items appear in the loading table.
```

## Implementation

Depending on the installed modules, signals are emitted using [Louie](https://pypi.org/project/Louie/) or [PyDispatcher](https://pypi.org/project/PyDispatcher/). The former being based on the later. The developer does not need to deal with the differences between those two modules as it is already being handled in the file [dispatcher](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/dispatcher.py).
 **_NOTE:_**  can we remove any of those dependencies?

> PyDispatcher provides the Python programmer with a multiple-producer-multiple-consumer signal registration and routing infrastructure for use in multiple contexts

When certain events or conditions occur within a hardware object, corresponding signals are emitted to inform connected components or modules about these changes.

> The {py:class}`mxcubecore.BaseHardwareObjects.HardwareObject` class serves as the base class for all hardware objects in MXCuBE. It includes methods for defining and emitting signals, allowing derived classes to customize signal emission based on their specific requirements.

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking it is the HardwareObject  OR HardwareObjectYaml class (both inherit from HardwareObjectMixin). Once we unify the YAML and XML configuration this distinction should hopefully disappear.

Author: added this clarification in the text

# MXCuBECore HardwareObject signals

:Created: 20240318

MXCuBE relies heavily on signals being emitted and listened to by many elements. For example, a hardware object may listen to other lower level hardware objects in order to update values after some calculation. But it is also critical in the UI (both web and Qt), in both cases they expect periodic signal updates for displaying the most recent information to the user (e.g. motor positions, data collection state, etc.)

## Implementation

> Depending on the installed modules, signals are emitted using [Louie](https://pypi.org/project/Louie/) or [PyDispatcher](https://pypi.org/project/PyDispatcher/). The former being based on the later. The developer does not need to deal with the differences between those two modules as it is already being handled in the file [dispatcher](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/dispatcher.py).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Depending on the installed modules, signals are emitted using [Louie](https://pypi.org/project/Louie/) or [PyDispatcher](https://pypi.org/project/PyDispatcher/). The former being based on the latter. The developer does not need to deal with the differences between those two modules as it is already being handled in the file [`dispatcher.py`](https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/blob/develop/mxcubecore/dispatcher.py).
```

 **_NOTE:_**  can we remove any of those dependencies?

> PyDispatcher provides the Python programmer with a multiple-producer-multiple-consumer signal registration and routing infrastructure for use in multiple contexts

When certain events or conditions occur within a hardware object, corresponding signals are emitted to inform connected components or modules about these changes.

The {py:class}`mxcubecore.BaseHardwareObjects.HardwareObject` class serves as the base class for all hardware objects in MXCuBE. It includes methods for defining and emitting signals, allowing derived classes to customize signal emission based on their specific requirements.

> >Strictly speaking it is the HardwareObject OR HardwareObjectYaml class (both inherit from HardwareObjectMixin). Once we unify the YAML and XML configuration this distinction should hopefully disappear.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> Strictly speaking it is the `HardwareObject` OR `HardwareObjectYaml` class (both inherit from `HardwareObjectMixin`). Once we unify the YAML and XML configuration, this distinction should hopefully disappear.
```

### Emit

Signals are typically emitted when the state of a hardware object changes, such as when it becomes ready for operation, encounters an error, or completes a task. Additionally, signals may be emitted to indicate changes in parameters or settings of the hardware, such as new setpoints, values, or configuration options.

To emit a signal, derived classes can use the {py:meth}`mxcubecore.BaseHardwareObjects.HardwareObjectMixin.emit` method provided by the {py:class}`HardwareObject` class. This method takes the name of the signal as an argument and optionally includes additional data or parameters to pass along with the signal. This method calls the `dispatcher.send` method.

From the {py:class}`HardwareObjectMixin` class (removing extra lines for brevity):

```
    def emit(self, signal: Union[str, object, Any], *args) -> None:
        signal = str(signal)

        if len(args) == 1:
            if isinstance(args[0], tuple):
                args = args[0]
        dispatcher.send(signal, self, *args)

> ```

Reviewer 4: Not convinced this code sample is needed. Same with `connect` below. One can always go look in the classes mentioned. There is also the risk that the docs might fall out of sync in the future if the code ever changes.

Author: yeah I know, but I still think it makes the description easier to understand. That code has not changed much anyway in the recent mxcube history

2024-03-18 12:21:15.402110 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.7041173058901172,)
2024-03-18 12:21:18.407419 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.39293503718591827
2024-03-18 12:21:18.407770 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.39293503718591827,)
2024-03-18 12:21:21.411648 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.8190801968640632
2024-03-18 12:21:21.411897 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.8190801968640632,)
2024-03-18 12:21:24.417379 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.5170546126120815
2024-03-18 12:21:24.418428 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.5170546126120815,)
2024-03-18 12:21:27.420696 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.27400475091220955
2024-03-18 12:21:27.421434 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.27400475091220955,)
2024-03-18 12:21:30.426785 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.3473955083798488
2024-03-18 12:21:30.427018 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.3473955083798488,)
2024-03-18 12:21:33.427715 | valueChanged emitted, new value: 0.9503048610962694
2024-03-18 12:21:33.427902 | valueChanged callback, arguments: (0.9503048610962694,)
In [3]: ho1.stop()
```

As you can see, the second hardware object receives and processes first one's signal.

> > At least one entry must appear in the beamline's YAML configuration file. In this case I left the procedure mockup only, all the other mockups are commented. That is why only a few items appear in the loading table.

Reviewer 4: Maybe reword to avoid using the first person "I"?

## General signals List

> The following tables list the generic signals as well the signals from the some of the most important hardware objects. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following tables list the generic signals as well as the signals from some of the most important hardware objects. 
```
